Author: Samuel Taylor Coleridge
Title: Coleridge's Literary Remains, Volume 4.

Chap. XXXVII. p To conclude, (said Luther), I never yet knew a troubled and perplexed man, that was right in his own wits. A sound observation of great practical utility. Edward Irving should be aware of this in dealing with conscience-troubled (but in fact fancy-vexed) women. Ib. It was not a thorn in the flesh touching the unchaste love he bore towards Tecla, as the Papists dream. I should like to know how high this strange legend can be traced. The other tradition that St. Paul was subject to epileptic fits, has a less legendary character. The phrase 'thorn in the flesh' is scarcely reconcilable with Luther's hypothesis, otherwise than as doubts of the objectivity of his vision, and of his after revelations may have been consequences of the disease, whatever that might be. Ib. p Our Lord God doth like a printer, who setteth the letters backwards; we see and feel well his setting, but we shall see the print yonder in the life to come. A beautiful simile. Add that even in this world the lives, especially the autobiographies, of eminent servants of Christ, are like the looking-glass or mirror, which, reversing the types, renders them legible to us. Ib. p 'Indignus sum, sed dignus fui--creari a Deo', &c. Although I am unworthy, yet nevertheless 'I have been' worthy, 'in that I am' created of God, &c. The translation does not give the true sense of the Latin. It should be 'was' and 'to be'. The 'dignus fui' has here the sense of 'dignum me habuit Deus'. See Herbert's little poem in the Temple: Sweetest Saviour, if my soul Were but worth the having, Quickly should I then control Any thought of waving; But when all my care and pains Cannot give the name of gains To thy wretch so full of stains, What delight or hope remains? Ib. p The chiefest physic for that disease (but very hard and difficult it is to be done) is, that they firmly hold such cogitations not to be theirs, but that most sure and certain they come of the Devil. More and more I understand the immense difference between the Faith-article of 'the Devil' (