Author: Samuel Taylor Coleridge
Title: Coleridge's Literary Remains, Volume 4.

or anti-philtre to inflame the scorn of the enemies of Methodism, but which must utterly incapacitate it for the better purpose of convincing the consciences or allaying the fanaticism of the Methodists themselves; this is the uniform and gross mis-statement of the one great point in dispute, by which the Methodists are represented as holding the compatibility of an impure life with a saving faith: whereas they only assert that the works of righteousness are the consequence, not the price, of Redemption, a gift included in the great gift of salvation;--and therefore not of merit but of imputation through the free love of the Saviour. Part I. p It is enough, it seems, that all the disorderly classes of mankind, prompted as they are by their worst passions to trample on the public welfare, should 'know' that they are, what every one else is convinced they are, the pests of society, and the evil is remedied. They are not to be exhorted to honesty, sobriety, or the observance of any laws, human or divine--they must not even be entreated to do their best. "Just as 'absurd' would it be," we are told, "in a physician to send away his patient, when labouring under some desperate disease, with a recommendation to do his utmost towards his own cure, and then to come to him to finish it, as it is in the minister of the 'Gospel' to propose to the sinner 'to do his best', by way of healing the disease of the soul--and then to come to the Lord Jesus to perfect his recovery. The 'only' previous qualification is to 'know' our misery, and the remedy is prepared." See Dr. Hawker's Works, vol. vi. p For "know," let the Barrister substitute "feel;" that is, we know it as we know our life; and then ask himself whether the production of such a state of mind in a sinner would or would not be of greater promise as to his reformation than the repetition of the Ten Commandments with paraphrases on the same.--But why not both? The Barrister is at least as wrong in the undervaluing of the one as the pseudo-Evangelists in the exclusion of the other. Ib. p Whatever these new Evangelists may teach to the contrary, the present state of public morals and of public happiness would assume a very different appearance if the thieves, swindlers, and highway robbers, would 'do their best' towards maintaining themselves by honest labour, instead of perpetually planning new systems of fraud, and new schemes of depredation. That is, if these thieves had a different will--not a mere wish, however anxious:--for this wish "the libertine" doubtless has, as described in p. ,--but an effective will. Well, and who doubts this? The point in dispute is, as to the means of producing this reformation in the will; which, whatever the Barrister may think, Christ at least thought so difficult as to speak of it, not once or twice, but uniformly, as little less than miraculous, as tantamount to a re-creation. This Barrister may be likened to an ignorant but well-meaning Galenist, who writing against some infamous quack, who lived by puffing and vending pills of mercurial sublimate for all cases of a certain description, should have no stronger argument than to extol 'sarsaparilla', and 'lignum vitæ', or 'senna' in contempt of all mercurial preparations. Ib. p Not for the revenues of an Archbishop would he exhort them to a duty 'unknown in Scripture', of adding their five talents to the five they have received, &c. All this is mere calumny and wilful misstatement of the tenets of Wesley, who never doubted that we are bound to improve our 'talents', or, on the other hand, that we are equally bound, having done so, to be equally thankful to the Giver of all things for the power and the will by which we improved the talents, as for the original capital which is the object of the improvement. The question is not whether Christ will say, 'Well done thou good and faithful servant', &c.;--but whether the servant is to say it of himself. Now Christ has delivered as positive a precept against our doing this as the promise can be that he will impute it to us, if we do not impute it to our own merits. Ib. p The complaints of the profligacy of servants of every class, and of the depravity of the times are in every body's hearing:--and these Evangelical tutors--the dear Mr. Lovegoods of the day--deserve the best attention of the public for thus instructing the ignorant multitude, who are always ready enough to neglect their moral duties, to despise and insult those by whom they are taught. All this is no better than infamous slander, unless the Barrister can prove that these depraved servants and thieves are Methodists, or have been wicked in proportion as they were proselyted to Methodism. O folly! This is indeed to secure the triumph of these enthusiasts. Ib. It must afford him (Rowland Hill) great consolation, amidst the increasing immorality * * * that when their village Curate exhorts them, if they have 'faith' in the doctrine of a world to come, to add to it those 'good works' in which the sum and substance of religion consist, he has led them to ridicule him, as 'chopping a new-fashioned' logic. That this is either false or nugatory, see proved in The Friend. Ib. p Tom Payne himself never laboured harder to root all virtue out of society.--Mandeville nor Voltaire never even laboured so much. Indeed! Ib. They were content with declaring their disbelief of a future state. In what part of their works? Can any wise man read Mandeville's Fable of the Bees, and not see that it is a keen satire on the inconsistency of Christians, and so intended. Ib. p When the populace shall be once brought to a conviction that the Gospel, as they are told, has neither terms nor conditions * * *, that no sins can be too great, no life too impure, 'no offences too many or too aggravated', to disqualify the perpetrators of them for --salvation, &c. Merely insert the words "sincere repentance and amendment of heart and life, and therefore for" salvation,--and is not this truth, and Gospel truth? And is it not the meaning of the preacher? Did any Methodist ever teach that salvation may be attained without sanctification? This Barrister for ever forgets that the whole point in dispute is not concerning the possibility of an immoral Christian being saved, which the Methodist would deny as strenuously as himself, and perhaps give an austerer sense to the word immoral; but whether morality, or as the Methodists would call it, sanctification, be the price which we pay for the purchase of our salvation with our own money, or a part of the same free gift. God knows, I am no advocate for Methodism; but for fair statement I am, and most zealously--even for the love of logic, putting honesty out of sight. Ib. p "In every age," says the moral divine (Blair), "the practice has prevailed of substituting certain appearances of piety in the place of the great 'duties' of humanity and mercy," &c. Will the Barrister rest the decision of the controversy on a comparison of the lives of the Methodists and non-Methodists? Unless he knows that their "morality has declined, as their piety has become more ardent," is not his quotation mere labouring--nay, absolute pioneering--for the triumphal chariot of his enemies? Ib. pp. -. It is but fair to select a specimen of Evangelical preaching from one of its most celebrated and popular champions * *. He will preface it with the solemn and woful communication of the Evangelist John, in order to show how exactly they accord, how clearly the doctrines of the one are deduced from the Revelation of the other, and how justly, therefore, it assumes the exclusive title of evangelical. 'And I saw the dead * * * and the dead were judged out of those things which were written in the books, according to their works. And the sea gave up the dead * * and they were judged every man according to his works'. Rev. xx. , . Let us recall to mind the urgent caution conveyed in the writings of Paul * * 'Be not deceived; God is not mocked; for whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap'. And let us further add * * the confirmation * * of the Saviour himself:--'When the Son of Man shall come in his glory, * * * but the righteous into life eternal'. Matt. xxv. , 'ad finem'. Let us now attend to the Evangelical preacher, (Toplady). "The Religion of Jesus Christ stands eminently distinguished, and essentially differenced, from every other religion that was ever proposed to human reception, by this remarkable peculiarity; that, look abroad in the world, and you will find that every religion, 'except one', puts you upon 'doing something', in order to recommend yourself to God. A Mahometan * * A Papist * * * It is only the religion of Jesus Christ that runs counter to all the rest, by affirming--that we are 'saved' and called with a holy calling, 'not' according to our works, but according to the Father's own purpose and grace, which was 'not' sold to us 'on certain conditions to be fulfilled by ourselves', but was given us in Christ before the world began." Toplady's Works: Sermon on James ii 'Si sic omnia'! All this is just and forcible; and surely nothing can be easier than to confute the Methodist by shewing that his very 'no-doing', when he comes to explain it, is not only an act, a work, but even a very severe and perseverant energy of the will. He is therefore to be arraigned of nonsense and abuse of words rather than of immoral doctrines. Ib. p The sacred volume of Holy Writ declares that 'true' (pure?) 'religion and undefiled before God and the Father is this, to visit the fatherless and widow in their affliction, and to keep himself unspotted from the world'. James i. This is now at least, whatever might have been the meaning of the word 'religion' in the time of the Translators, a false version. St. James is speaking of persons eminently zealous in those public or private acts of worship, which we call divine service,