Author: Samuel Taylor Coleridge
Title: Coleridge's Literary Remains, Volume 4.

are excellent, but here Skelton offends against his own canons. I should feel no reluctance, moral or speculative, in accepting the apparent necessity of both propositions, as a sufficient reason for believing both; and the transcendancy of the subject as a sufficient solution of their apparent incompatibility. But yet I think that another view of the subject, not less congruous with universal reason and more agreeable to the light of reason in the human understanding, might be defended, without detracting from any perfection of the Divine Being. Nay, I think that Skelton needed but one step more to have seen it. Ib. p 'In fine.' To what purpose were these Reflections, taken as a whole, written? I cannot answer. To dissuade men from reasoning on a subject beyond our faculties? Then why all this reasoning? Vol. IV. p Deism Revealed. 'Shepherd'. Were you ever at Constantinople, Sir? 'Dechaine'. Never. 'Shep.' Yet I believe you have no more doubt there is such a city, than that the three angles of a triangle are equal to two right ones. 'Temp.' I am sure have not. 'Dech.' Nor I; but what then? 'Shep.' Pray, Mr. Dechaine, did you see Julius Cæsar assassinated in the Capitol? 'Dech.' A pretty question! No indeed, Sir. 'Shep.' Have you any doubts about the truth of what is told us by the historians concerning that memorable transaction? 'Dech.' Not the least. 'Shep.' Pray, is it either self-evident or demonstrable to you, at this time and place, that there is any such city as Constantinople, or that there ever was such a man as Cæsar? 'Dech.' By no means. 'Shep.' And you have all you know concerning the being of either the city, or the man, merely from the report of others, who had it from others, and so on, through many links of tradition? 'Dech.' I have. 'Shep.' You see then, that there are certain cases, in which the evidence of things not seen nor either sensibly or demonstrably perceived, can justly challenge so entire an assent, that he who should pretend to refuse it in the fullest measure of acquiescence, would be deservedly esteemed the most stupid or perverse of mankind. That there is a sophism here, every one must feel in the very fact of being 'non-plus'd' without being convinced. The sophism consists in the instance being 'haud ejusdem generis' (