Author: Samuel Taylor Coleridge
Title: Coleridge's Literary Remains, Volume 4.

. This gives the true sense of Pliny--'venerare Deos' (that is, their statues, and the like,) 'et numina Deorum', that is, those spiritual influences which are represented by the images and persons of Apollo, Minerva, and the rest. Ib. p Religion has for its object the moral care and the moral cultivation of man. Its beauty is not to be sought in the regions of mystery, or in the flights of abstraction. What ignorance! Is there a single moral precept of the Gospels not to be found in the Old Testament? Not one. A new edition of White's 'Diatessaron', with a running comment the Hebrew, Greek, and Roman writers before Christ, and those after him who, it is morally certain, drew no aids from the New Testament, is a grand 'desideratum'; and if anything could open the eyes of Socinians, this would do it. Ib. p The masculine strength and moral firmness which once distinguished the great mass of the British people is daily fading away. Methodism with all its cant, &c. Well! but in God's name can Methodism be at once the effect and the cause of this loss of masculine strength and moral firmness?--Did Whitfield and Wesley blow them out at the first puff--these grand virtues of masculine strength and moral firmness? Admire, I pray you, the happy antithesis. Yet "feminine" would be an improvement, as then the sense too would be antithetic. However, the sound is sufficient, and modern rhetoric possesses the virtue of economy. Ib. p So with the Tinker; I would give him the care of kettles, but I would not give him 'the cure of souls'. So long as he attended to the management and mending of his pots and pans, I would wish success to his ministry: but when he came to declare 'himself' a "chosen vessel," and demand permission to take the souls of the people into his holy keeping, I should think that, instead of a 'licence', it would be more humane and more prudent to give him a passport to St. Luke's. Depend upon it, such men were never sent by Providence to rule or to regulate mankind. Whoo! Bounteous Providence that always looks at the body clothes and the parents' equipage before it picks out the proper soul for the baby! Ho! the Duchess of Manchester is in labour:--quick, Raphael, or Uriel, bring a soul out of the Numa bin, a young Lycurgus. Or the Archbishop's lady:--ho! a soul from the Chrysostom or Athanasian locker.--But poor Moll Crispin is in the throes with twins:--well! there are plenty of cobblers' and tinkers' souls in the hold--John Bunyan!! Why, thou miserable Barrister, it would take an angel an eternity to tinker thee into a skull of half his capacity! Ib. p. , . "A 'truly' awakened conscience," (these anti-moral editors of the Pilgrim's Progress assure us,) "can never find relief from the law: (that is, the 'moral law'.) The more he looks for peace 'this way, his guilt', like a heavy burden, becomes more intolerable; when he becomes 'dead' to the 'law',--as to 'any dependence upon it for salvation',--by the body of Christ, and married to him, who was raised from the dead, then, and not till then, his heart is set at liberty, to run the way of God's commandments." Here we are taught that the 'conscience' can never find relief from obedience to the law of the Gospel. False. We are told by Bunyan and his editors that the conscience can never find relief for its disobedience to the Law in the Law itself;--and this is as true of the moral as of the Mosaic Law. I am not defending Calvinism or Bunyan's theology; but if victory, not truth, were my object, I could desire no easier task than to defend it against our doughty Barrister. Well, but I repent--that is, regret it!--Yes! and so you doubtless regret the loss of an eye or arm:--will that make it grow again?--Think you this nonsense as applied to morality? Be it so! But yet nonsense most tremendously suited to human nature it is, as the Barrister may find in the arguments of the Pagan philosophers against Christianity, who attributed a large portion of its success to its holding out an expiation, which no other religion did. Read but that most affecting and instructive anecdote selected from the Hindostan Missionary Account by the Quarterly Review