Author: William Wordsworth
Title: The Poetical Works of William Wordsworth, Volume 5 (of 8)

And tens of thousands suffer wrong as deep. Yet be it asked, in justice to our age, If there were not, before those arts appeared, These structures rose, commingling old and young, And unripe sex with sex, for mutual taint; If there were not, _then_ in our far-famed Isle, Multitudes, who from infancy had breathed Air unimprisoned, and had lived at large; Yet walked beneath the sun, in human shape, As abject, as degraded? At this day, Who shall enumerate the crazy huts And tottering hovels, whence do issue forth A ragged Offspring, with their upright hair Crowned like the image of fantastic Fear; Or wearing, (shall we say?) in that white growth An ill-adjusted turban, for defence Or fierceness, wreathed around their sun-burnt brows, By savage Nature? Shrivelled are their lips; Naked, and coloured like the soil, the feet On which they stand; as if thereby they drew Some nourishment, as trees do by their roots, From earth, the common mother of us all. Figure and mien, complexion and attire, Are leagued to strike dismay; but outstretched hand And whining voice denote them supplicants For the least boon that pity can bestow. Such on the breast of darksome heaths are found; And with their parents occupy the skirts Of furze-clad commons; such are born and reared At the mine's mouth under impending rocks; Or dwell in chambers of some natural cave; Or where their ancestors erected huts, For the convenience of unlawful gain, In forest purlieus; and the like are bred, All England through, where nooks and slips of ground Purloined, in times less jealous than our own, From the green margin of the public way, A residence afford them, 'mid the bloom And gaiety of cultivated fields. Such (we will hope the lowest in the scale) Do I remember oft-times to have seen 'Mid Buxton's dreary heights. In earnest watch, Till the swift vehicle approach, they stand; Then, following closely with the cloud of dust, An uncouth feat exhibit, and are gone Heels over head, like tumblers on a stage. --Up from the ground they snatch the copper coin, And, on the freight of merry passengers Fixing a steady eye, maintain their speed; And spin--and pant--and overhead again, Wild pursuivants! until their breath is lost, Or bounty tires--and every face, that smiled Encouragement, hath ceased to look that way. --But, like the vagrants of the gipsy tribe, These, bred to little pleasure in themselves, Are profitless to others