Author: William Wordsworth
Title: The Poetical Works of William Wordsworth, Volume 5 (of 8)

This ardent sally pleased the mild good Man, To whom the appeal couched in its closing words Was pointedly addressed; and to the thoughts That, in assent or opposition, rose Within his mind, he seemed prepared to give Prompt utterance; but the Vicar interposed With invitation urgently renewed. --We followed, taking as he led, a path Along a hedge of hollies dark and tall, Whose flexile boughs low bending with a weight Of leafy spray, concealed the stems and roots That gave them nourishment. When frosty winds Howl from the north, what kindly warmth, methought, Is here--how grateful this impervious screen! --Not shaped by simple wearing of the foot On rural business passing to and fro Was the commodious walk: a careful hand Had marked the line, and strewn its surface o'er With pure cerulean gravel, from the heights Fetched by a neighbouring brook.--Across the vale The stately fence accompanied our steps; And thus the pathway, by perennial green Guarded and graced, seemed fashioned to unite, As by a beautiful yet solemn chain, The Pastor's mansion with the house of prayer. Like image of solemnity, conjoined With feminine allurement soft and fair, The mansion's self displayed;--a reverend pile With bold projections and recesses deep; Shadowy, yet gay and lightsome as it stood Fronting the noontide sun. We paused to admire The pillared porch, elaborately embossed; The low wide windows with their mullions old; The cornice, richly fretted, of grey stone; And that smooth slope from which the dwelling rose, By beds and banks Arcadian of gay flowers And flowering shrubs, protected and adorned: Profusion bright! and every flower assuming A more than natural vividness of hue, From unaffected contrast with the gloom Of sober cypress, and the darker foil Of yew, in which survived some traces, here Not unbecoming, of grotesque device And uncouth fancy. From behind the roof Rose the slim ash and massy sycamore, Blending their diverse foliage with the green Of ivy, flourishing and thick, that clasped The huge round chimneys, harbour of delight For wren and redbreast,--where they sit and sing Their slender ditties when the trees are bare. Nor must I leave untouched (the picture else Were incomplete) a relique of old times Happily spared, a little Gothic niche Of nicest workmanship; that once had held The sculptured image of some patron-saint, Or of the blessed Virgin, looking down On all who entered those religious doors. But lo! where from the cocky garden-mount Crowned by its antique summer-house--descends, Light as the silver fawn, a radiant Girl; For she hath recognised her honoured friend, The Wanderer ever welcome! A prompt kiss The gladsome Child bestows at his request; And, up the flowery lawn as we advance, Hangs on the old Man with a happy look, And with a pretty restless hand of love. --We enter--by the Lady of the place Cordially greeted. Graceful was her port: A lofty stature undepressed by time, Whose visitation had not wholly spared The finer lineaments of form and face; To that complexion brought which prudence trusts in And wisdom loves.--But when a stately ship Sails in smooth weather by the placid coast On homeward voyage, what--if wind and wave, And hardship undergone in various climes, Have caused her to abate the virgin pride, And that full trim of inexperienced hope With which she left her haven--not for this, Should the sun strike her, and the impartial breeze Play on her streamers, fails she to assume Brightness and touching beauty of her own, That charm all eyes. So bright, so fair, appeared This goodly Matron, shining in the beams Of unexpected pleasure.--Soon the board Was spread, and we partook a plain repast. Here, resting in cool shelter, we beguiled The mid-day hours with desultory talk; From trivial themes to general argument Passing, as accident or fancy led, Or courtesy prescribed. While question rose And answer flowed, the fetters of reserve Dropping from every mind, the Solitary Resumed the manners of his happier days; And in the various conversation bore A willing, nay, at times, a forward part; Yet with the grace of one who in the world Had learned the art of pleasing, and had now Occasion given him to display his skill, Upon the stedfast 'vantage-ground of truth. He gazed, with admiration unsuppressed, Upon the landscape of the sun-bright vale, Seen, from the shady room in which we sate, In softened pérspective; and more than once Praised the consummate harmony serene Of gravity and elegance, diffused Around the mansion and its whole domain; Not, doubtless, without help of female taste And female care.--