Author: Matthew Arnold
Title: Matthew Arnold's Sohrab and Rustum and Other Poems

-- Iseult!... Ah, poor soul! if this be so, Only death can balm thy woe. The solitudes of the green wood Had no medicine for thy mood; The rushing battle clear'd thy blood As little as did solitude. --Ah! his eyelids slowly break Their hot seals, and let him wake; What new change shall we now see? A happier? Worse it cannot be. _Tristram_. Is my page here? Come, turn me to the fire! Upon the window-panes the moon shines bright; The wind is down--but she'll not come to-night. Ah no! she is asleep in Cornwall now, Far hence; her dreams are fair--smooth is her brow Of me she recks not,° nor my vain desire. ° --I have had dreams, I have had dreams, my page, Would take a score years from a strong man's age; And with a blood like mine, will leave, I fear, Scant leisure for a second messenger. --My princess, art thou there? Sweet, do not wait! To bed, and sleep! my fever is gone by; To-night my page shall keep me company. Where do the children sleep? kiss them for me! Poor child, thou art almost as pale as I; This comes of nursing long and watching late. To bed--good night!° ° She left the gleam-lit fireplace, She came to the bed-side; She took his hands in hers--her tears Down on his wasted fingers rain'd. She raised her eyes upon his face-- Not with a look of wounded pride, A look as if the heart complained-- Her look was like a sad embrace; The gaze of one who can divine A grief, and sympathise. Sweet flower! thy children's eyes Are not more innocent than thine. But they sleep in shelter'd rest, Like helpless birds in the warm nest, On the castle's southern side; Where feebly comes the mournful roar Of buffeting wind and surging tide Through many a room and corridor. --Full on their window the moon's ray Makes their chamber as bright as day. It shines upon the blank white walls, And on the snowy pillow falls, And on two angel-heads doth play Turn'd to each other--the eyes closed, The lashes on the cheeks reposed. Round each sweet brow the cap close-set Hardly lets peep the golden hair; Through the soft-open'd lips the air Scarcely moves the coverlet. One little wandering arm is thrown At random on the counterpane, And often the fingers close in haste As if their baby-owner chased The butterflies again. This stir they have, and this alone; But else they are so still! --Ah, tired madcaps! you lie still; But were you at the window now, To look forth on the fairy sight Of your illumined haunts by night, To see the park-glades where you play Far lovelier than they are by day, To see the sparkle on the eaves, And upon every giant-bough Of those old oaks, whose wet red leaves Are jewell'd with bright drops of rain-- How would your voices run again! And far beyond the sparkling trees Of the castle-park one sees The bare heaths spreading, clear as day, Moor behind moor, far, far away, Into the heart of Brittany. And here and there, lock'd by the land, Long inlets of smooth glittering sea, And many a stretch of watery sand All shining in the white moon-beams-- But you see fairer in your dreams! What voices are these on the clear night-air? What lights in the court--what steps on the stair? II ISEULT OF IRELAND° _Tristram_. Raise the light, my page! that I may see her.-- Thou art come at last, then, haughty Queen! Long I've waited, long I've fought my fever; Late thou comest, cruel thou hast been. _Iseult_. Blame me not, poor sufferer! that I tarried; Bound I was, I could not break the band. Chide not with the past, but feel the present! I am here--we meet--I hold thy hand. _Tristram_. Thou art come, indeed--thou hast rejoin'd me; Thou hast dared it--but too late to save. Fear not now that men should tax thine honour! I am dying: build--(thou may'st)--my grave! _Iseult_. Tristram, ah, for love of Heaven, speak kindly! What, I hear these bitter words from thee? Sick with grief I am, and faint with travel-- Take my hand--dear Tristram, look on me! _Tristram_. I forgot, thou comest from thy voyage-- Yes, the spray is on thy cloak and hair. But thy dark eyes are not dimm'd, proud Iseult! And thy beauty never was more fair. _Iseult_. Ah, harsh flatterer! let alone my beauty! I, like thee, have left my youth afar. Take my hand, and touch these wasted fingers-- See my cheek and lips, how white they are! _Tristram_. Thou art paler--but thy sweet charm, Iseult! Would not fade with the dull years away. Ah, how fair thou standest in the moonlight! I forgive thee, Iseult!--thou wilt stay? _Iseult_. Fear me not, I will be always with thee; I will watch thee, tend thee, soothe thy pain; Sing thee tales of true, long-parted lovers, Join'd at evening of their days again. _Tristram_. No, thou shalt not speak! I should be finding Something alter'd in thy courtly tone. Sit--sit by me! I will think, we've lived so In the green wood, all our lives, alone. _Iseult_. Alter'd, Tristram? Not in courts, believe me, Love like mine is alter'd in the breast; Courtly life is light and cannot reach it-- Ah! it lives, because so deep-suppress'd! What, thou think'st men speak in courtly chambers Words by which the wretched are consoled? What, thou think'st this aching brow was cooler, Circled, Tristram, by a band of gold? Royal state with Marc, my deep-wrong'd husband-- That was bliss to make my sorrows flee! Silken courtiers whispering honied nothings°-- Those were friends to make me false to thee! Ah, on which, if both our lots were balanced, Was indeed the heaviest burden thrown-- Thee, a pining exile in thy forest, Me, a smiling queen upon my throne? Vain and strange debate, where both have suffer'd, Both have pass'd a youth consumed and sad, Both have brought their anxious day to evening, And have now short space for being glad! Join'd we are henceforth; nor will thy people, Nor thy younger Iseult take it ill, That a former rival shares her office, When she sees her humbled, pale, and still. I, a faded watcher by thy pillow, I, a statue on thy chapel-floor, Pour'd in prayer before the Virgin-Mother, Rouse no anger, make no rivals more. She will cry: