Author: Matthew Arnold
Title: Matthew Arnold's Sohrab and Rustum and Other Poems

So said he, and dropp'd Sohrab's hand, and left His bed, and the warm rugs whereon he lay; And o'er his chilly limbs his woollen coat He pass'd, and tied his sandals on his feet, And threw a white cloak round him, and he took In his right hand a ruler's staff, no sword°; °And on his head he set his sheep-skin cap, Black, glossy, curl'd, the fleece of Kara-Kul°; °And raised the curtain of his tent, and call'd His herald to his side, and went abroad. The sun by this had risen, and clear'd the fog From the broad Oxus and the glittering sands. And from their tents the Tartar horsemen filed Into the open plain; so Haman° bade-- °Haman, who next to Peran-Wisa ruled The host, and still was in his lusty prime. From their black tents, long files of horse, they stream'd; As when some grey November morn the files, In marching order spread, of long-neck'd cranes Stream over Casbin° and the southern slopes °Of Elburz,° from the Aralian estuaries, °Or some frore° Caspian reed-bed, southward bound °For the warm Persian sea-board--so they stream'd. The Tartars of the Oxus, the King's guard, First, with black sheep-skin caps and with long spears; Large men, large steeds; who from Bokhara° come °And Khiva,° and ferment the milk of mares.° °Next, the more temperate Toorkmuns° of the south, °The Tukas,° and the lances of Salore, °And those from Attruck° and the Caspian sands; °Light men and on light steeds, who only drink The acrid milk of camels, and their wells. And then a swarm of wandering horse, who came From far, and a more doubtful service own'd; The Tartars of Ferghana,° from the banks °Of the Jaxartes,° men with scanty beards °And close-set skull-caps; and those wilder hordes Who roam o'er Kipchak° and the northern waste, °Kalmucks° and unkempt Kuzzaks,° tribes who stray °Nearest the Pole, and wandering Kirghizzes,° °Who come on shaggy ponies from Pamere; These all filed out from camp into the plain. And on the other side the Persians form'd;-- First a light cloud of horse, Tartars they seem'd. The Ilyats of Khorassan°; and behind, °The royal troops of Persia, horse and foot, Marshall'd battalions bright in burnish'd steel. But Peran-Wisa with his herald came, Threading the Tartar squadrons to the front, And with his staff kept back the foremost ranks. And when Ferood, who led the Persians, saw That Peran-Wisa kept the Tartars back, He took his spear, and to the front he came, And check'd his ranks, and fix'd° them where they stood. °And the old Tartar came upon the sand Betwixt the silent hosts, and spake, and said:--